🟩 [View the live docs](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/)

# Writing and publishing docs

Our docs are written using [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) using the
[Doks](https://getdoks.org/) theme as the base.

Hugo is a static site generator. It converts markdown files to static html
pages. Edit the markdown files, and view the rendered site with the Hugo server.

## Build the docs locally

### Install Hugo

The development environment for Hugo requires NodeJS, with a number of
dependencies that need to be downloaded from the `package.json` file.

```
npm install
```

### Generating the reference

Our documentation contains an API reference section that is autogenerated from
the custom resource definitions of each ACK service. These reference documents
need to be re-generated each time there is a change to any of the fields or
versions of any of these CRDs.

The `scripts/gen_reference.py` file will attempt to navigate every service
controller repository in the `$GOPATH` and build a full model of every custom
resource and version based off the CRD base files. It will then output these
models using jinja2 templates into markdown files under
`content/reference/<service>/<version>/<resource>.md`.

To run `scripts/gen_reference.py` navigate to `community/docs`, install the 
python `requirements.txt` file and then run `python3 ./scripts/gen_reference.py`.

### Local preview

🟧 Test locally, including both the content and the navigation structure.

Note: Before you can run the local preview for the first time, you will need to [generate the API reference](#generating-the-reference).

The docs are just Markdown files and in order to see the rendered preview
locally (before PRing the repo), do:

```
 $ npm start
Start building sites …
hugo v0.87.0-B0C541E4+extended linux/amd64 BuildDate=2021-08-03T10:57:28Z VendorInfo=gohugoio

                   | EN
-------------------+------
  Pages            | 112
  Paginator pages  |   0
  Non-page files   |   5
  Static files     |  75
  Processed images |   0
  Aliases          |   0
  Sitemaps         |   1
  Cleaned          |   0

Built in 877 ms
Watching for changes in /local/home/go/src/github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/community/docs/{archetypes,assets,babel.config.js,content,data,layouts,node_modules,package.json,static}
Watching for config changes in /local/home/go/src/github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/community/docs/config/_default
Environment: "development"
Serving pages from memory
Running in Fast Render Mode. For full rebuilds on change: hugo server --disableFastRender
Web Server is available at http://localhost:1313/ (bind address 0.0.0.0)
Press Ctrl+C to stop
```

### Writing

The [Hugo documentation](https://gohugo.io/content-management/) includes
information on the structure of the `docs/` folder, and writing in markdown.

### Publish

To publish updated docs, commit changes to the markdown files and open a pull
request. When the commit is merged, the updated documentation is published by a
Prow job that runs whenever a new tag of any controller is published, or if any
part of the documentation is updated.

[View the status of Prow jobs.](https://prow.ack.aws.dev/?job=*-docs-release)
